Five Skandhas, also called the Five Aggregates or the Five Heaps.

5 skandhas  --> components that come together to make an individual(human being)

First noble truth:  life is 'dukkha' or life is suffering," or "stressful," or "unsatisfactory" or "impermanent" or "conditioned".

Glossary:
1. 'To be conditioned'  is to be dependent on or affected by something else. The Buddha taught that the skandhas were dukkha.
2. The deep meaning of greed is “excessive attraction” to a sensation that we deem to be agreeable or positive, while 
3. The deep meaning of anger (or hatred) is “excessive aversion(repulsion or घृणा)” to a sensation that we deem disagreeable or negative.
4. Neutral sensations: the result of our ignorance or lack of understanding, though as we progress in Buddhist practice they may be the result of wisdom.




6 sense organs & their sense objects are:
1. Eye --> Visible form
2. Ear --> Sound
3. Nose --> Odor
4. Tongue --> Taste
5. Skin/Touch --> Feel
6. Mind --> Thoughts & Ideas




5 aggregates or heaps of clinging are:
1. form (or material image, impression) (rupa)
2. sensations (or feelings, received from form) (vedana)
3. perceptions (samjna)
4. mental activity or formations (sankhara)
5. consciousness (vijnana)



FORM ( rupa ):
1. It means: matter, body or 'material form' of a being or any existence.
2. sentient beings are composed of four basic elements or forces: earth (solidity), water (cohesion), fire (heat) and wind (motion).

SENSATION  ( feeling ):
1. It means: experience of physical & mental sensation through our six sense organs.
2. It is either pleasant, unpleasant or neutral.
3. Greed and anger have their roots in the skandha of sensation.
    if we enjoy a positive sensation we are liable to become "greedy" about it, while if we do not enjoy it, we are liable to become “angry”.

PERCEPTION ( samjna ):
It means: mental process that labels, registers, & recognises.  -->  we are able to make distinctions among things.
eg: shape of tree, color green, emotion of fear, etc

MENTAL FORMATION ( samskara )
1. All volitional(स्वैच्छिक) actions, good and bad, are included in the aggregate of mental formations.
2. Volitional acts create karma.

CONSCIOUSNESS ( Vijnana )
1. Simply put, this is your awareness of skandhas 1 through 4. It is a product of the first four skandhas and is completely conditioned by them.
2. There are six types of vijnana (consciousness) within vijnana-skandha:
  2.1 eye consciousness 
  2.2 ear consciousness 
  2.3 nose consciousness 
  2.4 tounge consciousness 
  2.5 body consciousness 
  2.6 mind consciousness 

3. This is what we normally think of as being our “self.” 
    The Buddha taught the five skandhas primarily to help us understand that this “self” or consciousness is empty since it is entirely based on the conditions found in the first four skandhas.




Like all conditioned phenomena, the five skandhas are subject to change and decay. 
When you are at peace with this fact, you can be free from suffering.









