Buddhist cosmology identifies "six modes of being" / "six classes of beings" / "six destinies" / "six realms" / "six domains. These are:
1. Hell beings Realm -> lower realm
2. Hungry Ghosts Realm -> lower realm
3. Animal Realm -> lower realm
4. Human Realm -> higher realm
5. Demi-Gods Realm -> higher realm
6. God Realm -> higher realm


Karma plays a role in determining where we are born and reborn, which keeps happening until we reach nirvana and escape the cycle(samsara). 
Until then, we are stuck in the six realms.

According to buddhism, these 6 realms denotes psychological states of mind as well as physical cosmological realms.


If we consider it as 'psychological states of mind' then it actually depicts the condition or state or life of a human being and its behaviour:
1. Hell Realm:
    people living with extreme suffering(too painful).
    The Hell Realm is depicted as a place partly of fire and partly of ice.
    Fiery Hell Beings: angry and abusive
    Icy Hell Beings: unfeeling coldness (no sympathetic towards other people’s feelings).
    Hell beings become self-destructive.

2. Hungry Ghosts(pretas) Realm:
    Hungry ghosts are those driven by unquenchable desire, chasing the next possession, the next meal, the next relationship.
    They want more and more.
    Hungry Ghost: huge stomach, long thin neck
    2.1 Their necks are too thin to allow food to pass. So, they are always hungry.

3. Animal Realm:
    Animal Beings are driven by need to eat, sleep, and procreate(breeding).
    human in this state live mechanically, controlled by basic needs.
    They cling to what is familiar and are disinterested(or even fearful) of anything unfamiliar.
    Animal Beings devour(hurt) each other.
    They are not capable of rational thought or logic; so they are unable to reflect on their situation or practice the dharma.

4. Human Realm:
    The only realm where we can make effort to exit from 6 realms. (to get nirvana).
    The only one realm where buddha can appear.
    most suitable realm for practicing the dharma becoz humans are not completely distracted by pleasure (like the gods or demi-gods) or
       by pain and suffering (like the beings in the lower realms).

5. DemiGods(asuras / Jealous God) Realm:    -> priority is getting to top
    Asuras have pleasures almost as much as gods.
    But they are driven by desire of getting to top. So, always are in constant warfare(युद्ध), competition, jealousy and anger.
    They are perpetually at war with the Devas. But they always lose, as gods are much more powerful.
    It is the home of climbers on the corporate and social ladders—those who are driven to get ahead.

6. God(devas) Realm:
    Free of suffering & full of pleasure (God have wealth, power and happiness & long life).
    So, The gods develop attachments and have no motivation to escape samsara.
    Having exhausted their good karma, God suffer through being reborn in the lower realms.
    The Devas are perpetually at war with Asuras.



Each realm is said to be the result of one of the six main negative emotions: pride, jealousy, desire, ignorance, greed, and anger.
1. when the perception(धारणा) comes more from aggression(anger), you experience things in a hellish way.
2. When your perception is filtered through attachment, grasping or greed, you experience the hungry ghost realm.
3. When your perception is filtered through ignorance, then you experience the animal realm.
4. When you have a lot of pride, you are reborn in the god realm.
5. When you have jealousy, you are reborn in the asura (demi-god) realm.
6. When you have a lot of passion, you are reborn in the human realm. The Human Realm is marked by questioning and curiosity.