Different Names:
Dependent Origination, interdependent causation, dependent arising, interdependent co-arising, etc

According to "Law of Dependent Origination":
All phenomena arise due to multiple causes and conditions(कारण और प्रभाव).     or
everything that exists is conditioned, relative and interdependent.

That means, nothing occurs independently or by itself. All phenomenon exist due to their supportive components.
Without these supportive components, the phenomenon will come to an end.

This applies to the individual and the universe, to thoughts and objects, and to everthing that exists.



####The twelve links of dependent origination(12 Nidanas)####
The twelve links of dependent origination are chain that keeps us bound in the repetitive cycle of birth and death(samsara).      or
It is the links of phenomena that constitute the cycle of existence that makes up samsara.

This is not regarded as a linear path, but a cyclical one in which all links are connected to all other links.
Escaping samsara and achieving enlightenment is the result of breaking these links. 
Escape from samsara can be initiated at any link in the chain, as once any link is broken, a chain is useless. 

These are:
1. Ignorance(Avidya)
  1.1 ignorance of "Four Noble Truths"
  1.2 delusion of mistakenly perceiving the "skandhas" as a self.

2. Volitional formations(Samskara)  --> 4th Skandha
  2.1 Ignorance produces samskara(volitional action, formation, impulse or motivation).
  2.2 Since, we don't understand the truth, we have impulses that lead to actions that continue us along a path of samsaric existence.
  2.2 It sew the seeds of karma. 

3. Conditioned Consiousness(Vijnana) --> 5th Skandha
   It means, the awareness of sensory experience.
   There are six types of vijnana (consciousness) within vijnana-skandha:
  1 eye consciousness 
  2 ear consciousness 
  3 nose consciousness 
  4 tounge consciousness 
  5 body consciousness 
  6 mind consciousness 

4. Name-and-Form(Nama-rupa):
  Name: Mind,    Form: Body
  It represents the artificial assembly of the five skandhas to form the illusion of an individual, independent existence. 
  Nama-rupa works together with the next link, the six sense bases, to condition other links. 

5. six sense bases / 6 sense spheres (Six ayatanas):
  The six ayatanas are: eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, mind.

6. Sense Impressions(Sparsha)
  Sparsha is contact between the individual sense faculties(sense organs) and its sense objects(visible form, sound, smell, taste, touch, and ideas and thoughts). 
  The contact between sense faculties and objects leads to the experience of feeling, which is the next link.

7. Feelings / Sensation (Vedana):
   It is defined as the recognition and experience of pleasantness, unpleasantness or neutral feelings via sparsa.
   feelings are the precursor to desire and aversion--the clinging to pleasant feeling or the rejection of unpleasant feelings.

8. Desire or Craving (Trishna):
   craving or thirst for pleasurable sensations, etc.
   The Second Noble Truth teaches that Trishna is the cause of dukhha.
   If we are not mindful, we are perpetually being pulled around by desire for what we want & pushed by an aversion to what we don't want.

9. Attachment/grasping (Upadana):
   Upadana is the attached and clinging mind.
   When the object of craving comes to fruition, then the craving manifests as "grasping" to the object.
   We are attached to sensual pleasures, mistaken views, external forms, appearances, individual self.

10. Coming to be or Becoming (Bhava):
   Through this grasping one creates the karma that determines one’s next existence.

11. Birth(Jati):
   Through the power of becoming, one is reborn in a particular situation.
   unless the chain of dependent origination is broken, we will continue to experience birth into the samsaric life.
   
12. Old age and death(Jara-maranam):
   Birth inevitably leads to old age and death.  


The twelve links are illustrated in the outer ring of the Bhavachakra(Wheel of Life).
1. Ignorance is depicted as a "blind man or woman groping their way with a cane".
2. samskara usually is illustrated as "potters making pots".
3. vijnana is represented by "a monkey swinging from a tree". 
    A monkey leaps thoughtlessly from one thing to another, easily tempted and distracted by sensations.
    Monkey energy pulls us away from ourselves and away from the dharma.
4. nama-rupa is represented by "people in a boat" , traveling through samsara.
5. Six spheres is illustrated as a "house with six windows".​
6. The Wheel of Life illustrates sparsha as an "lovers embracing(गले लगाने), kissing or entwined".
7. vedana as an "arrow piercing an eye of a person" to represent sense data piercing the senses.
8. Trishna is illustrated as a "man drinking beer, usually surrounded by empty bottles".
9. Upadana is illustrated as a "monkey, or sometimes a person, picking a fruit".
10. Bhava is illustrated as "couple making love(intercourse)" or "a woman in an advanced state of pregnancy".
11. "a woman in childbirth" illustrates jati.
12. Jara-maranam is illustrated with "a corpse".