Buddhist cosmology is the description of the shape and evolution of the Universe.

It consists of a temporal and a spatial cosmology.

Temporal Cosmology:
describes the timespan of the creation and dissolvement of alternate universes in different aeons/eons(युगों ). 

Spatial Cosmology: displays the various worlds in which beings can be reborn.
It includes:
1. Vertical Cosmology:
    describes the arrangement of worlds in a vertical pattern, some being higher and some lower. 
    describes the various planes of beings, into which beings are reborn due to their merits and development.
2. Horizontal(sahasra) Cosmology:
    describes the grouping of these vertical worlds into sets of thousands, millions or billions.
    describes the distribution of these world-systems into an infinite sheet of existential dimensions included in the cycle of samsara.

The entire universe is said to be made up of five basic elements: Earth(Soil), Water, Fire, Air and Space.




Vertical Cosmology: 
It describe has three realms(dhatus / trailokya).
The three realms contain together thirty-one planes of existence, each corresponding to a different type of mentality.
1. Formless Realm(Arupyadhatu): consists 4 planes
2. Form Realm(Rupadhatu): consists 16 planes
3. Desire Realm(Kamadhatu): consists 15 planes




Formless Realm(Arupyadhatu / Arupaloka):
The Formless Realm would have no place in a purely physical cosmology.
It has no location.
None of the beings inhabiting it has either shape or location.



Desire Realm:
It consists 6 domains(6 planes / 6 lower realms):




The process by which sentient beings migrate from one state of existence to another is dependent on causes and conditions.
The three causes are giving or charity, moral conduct, meditative development, and their opposites.
1. Rebirth in Kama loka(desire realm) : depends on a person's moral conduct and practice of giving.
2. Rebirth in the Rupa-loka (form realm) and 
3. Arupa-loka (formless realm) also requires meditation development.