Nirvana  <-->  Salvation (Moksh)

Meaning of Nirvana:
1. extinguishing the fire of trishna(thirst).
    thirst for objects, living things, habits.

2. elimination of Raga, Dwesh & Moha.
   Raga :  refers to 'greed, sensuality, desire' or 'attachment to a sensory object'.
               It includes any form of desire including sexual desire and sensual passion, as well as attachments to, excitement over and pleasure derived from objects of the senses.
   Dwesh: feeling of hatred
   Moha: thinking the situation, objects & living things(like your loved ones) as permanent but actually they are temporary.
3. nirvana is the closure of the path of rebirth.
   Rebirth happens due to our desires.


Noble 8 fold path:
1.Right View (right understanding):
   1.1 Ignorance arises false view in the person. He considers situation, objects & living things as permanent but actually they are temporary.
   1.2 Knowing about suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the practice that leads to the cessation of suffering. This is called right view.
   1.3 Every action of body, speech, and mind has karmic results, and influences the kind of future rebirths.
2.Right resolve (right thought):
   Determination to follow the 4 noble truths.
3.Right Speech:
   3.1 no lying: but speak the truth at right time 
   3.2 no rude speech: no abusive speech, only soft speech
   3.3 no divisive speech: no telling one person what another says about him to cause discord or harm their relationship
   3.4 no idle chatter(gossip): never speaking something that is not beneficial. Do not speak more than necessary.
   3.5 use speech to cause good thoughts to arise in others and not bad thoughts.
4.Right Action:
   4.1 no killing: no intentionally killing, harming & torturing any sentient beings. Sentient beings->human,animal,bird,insect but excluding plants.
   4.2 no stealing: no intentionally taking what is not voluntarily offered by the person to whom that property belongs.
   4.3 no sexual misconduct: no sexual involvement with someone married, someone unmarried & no adultry.
   Adultery : voluntary sexual intercourse between a married person and a person who is not their spouse
5.Right Livelihood:
   5.1 Earning honestly by doing proper works. Receipt of money by unethical acts(like theft, fraud, bribery, etc) is prohibited.
   5.2 livelihood without causing suffering to sentient beings by cheating them, or harming or killing them in any way.
6.Right effort:
    Right Effort is :
    6.1 the effort to prevent the arising of evil states of mind that have not arisen
    6.2 the effort to overcome evil states of mind that have already arisen
    6.3 the effort to produce good states of mind that have not arisen
    6.4 the effort to develop further the good states of mind that have already arisen.

   Right Effort is efforts to remove the 5 hindrances:
   5 hindrances are identified as mental factors that hinder progress in meditation and in our daily lives.
   6.1 Sensual desire: seeking for pleasure through the 6 senses of sight, sound, smell, taste, physical feeling(touch) and thoughts(mind).
   6.2 Ill-will: feelings of hostility(शत्रुता), anger, hatred and bitterness(कटुता).
   6.3 Sloth(आलस्य)-and-torpor: half-hearted action with little or no effort or concentration.
   6.4 Restlessness-and-worry: the inability to calm the mind and focus one's energy. eg:worry, fear, anxiety. 
   6.5 Doubt: lack of conviction or trust in one's abilities.

7.Right Mindfulness(right concentration):
   7.1 complete awareness of all the activities of the body as they occur (kāyānupassanā)
   7.2 complete awareness of all sensations and feelings as they occur (vedanānupassanā)
   7.3 complete awareness of all activities of the mind as they occur(cittānupassanā) --> continuously monitor the thoughts going on in mind.
   7.4 complete awareness of all mental objects when the appropriate situations arise (dhammānupassanā)

8.Right meditation/Right Concentration:
   8.1 It is the ability to focus steadily one’s mind on any one object and one only, to the exclusion of all others.
   8.2 Long continued practice of mental concentration makes the mind highly penetrative.
   8.3 It becomes like a high-powered light which can thoroughly illuminate any object on which it is focussed.
   8.4 Hence any object of thought which presents itself to such a mind is thoroughly penetrated and comprehended through and through.
   8.5 The purpose of developing this concentration is to make use of its penetrative power to understand existence and thereby to realize the highest wisdom(paññā).


ThreeFold Division of EightFold Path:
These 8 factors are interdependent and mutually supporting. Anyone can start from anywhere.
These 8 factors fall into three different groups or categories of "virtue", "concentration" and "wisdom". This is known as threefold division of the Eightfold Path.
1. Sīla(virtue)
    1.1 It refers to moral discipline or purity of conduct(behaviour).
    1.2 It is the first step. It is the foundation for further progress along the Path.
    1.3 under this category appear three of the eight factors, viz. Right Speech, Right Action and Right Livelihood.
2. samādhi( Concentration )
    1.1 It refers to purity of mind.
    1.2 It is the second step.
    1.3 It includes Right Effort, Right Mindfulness and Right Concentration.
3. paññā( wisdom )
    3.1 After 'samādhi', we have developed highly concentrated mind.
    3.2 When this highly concentrated mind is made to focus its attention on the three great characteristics of existence, namely
          anicca (impermanence)
          dukkha (disharmony) and
          anattā (egolessness or soullessness),
          then the mind is able to see things as they actually are.
    3.3 It includes Right understanding and Right thought.  It is the third step.

The purer one’s conduct is, the purer is one’s mind,and the purer one’s mind is, the greater is his ability to concentrate. 
Then purity of conduct and purity of mind help in the realization of Wisdom.

    