The three marks of existence are three characteristics of all existence and beings:
1. impermanence (anicca), 
2. suffering or dissatisfaction (dukkha), 
3. no-self (anatta)




1.Impermanence --> Buddha's teaching

Impermanence:   everything(your loved ones, any situation, thoughts, health, job, etc) in this world are not permanent. They will change or cease.
Goal: Understanding impermanence allows us to change suffering into joy.


we do not suffer due to impermanence. But we suffer bcoz we want to believe that this particular thing is permanent (false view).
True view: we have to grow old, we have to have ill health, we have to die, we have to be separated from our loved ones one day.


Importance of Impermanence:
1. Everything will change or cease.But it doesn't mean to passively wait for it. Our actions can 'speed up' or 'slow down' the impermanence.
    eg: For those who are sick, we can take medicine & allow our bodies to heal to speed up the impermanence of disease.
    eg: If you are healthy, you can eat good things to slow down the impermanence of your health.
2. It teaches us values in our life.
    eg: Many do not care for their loved ones or spend time with them. When they get sick or die then they regrets.
          So, cherish them.
3. It can be a great aid in difficult situations.
    eg: If we are poor, impermanence teaches us that our circumstances will not last forever.
          If we meet a setback or tragedy, impermanence teaches that one day things will change for better.
    3.1 It teaches us that things can change for better if we truely work to better our circumstances.


5 Remembrances in buddhism:      eliminate false view of permanence & embrace impermanence
  1.I am of the nature to grow old. There is no way to escape growing old.
  2.I am of the nature to have ill health. There is no way to escape having ill health.
  3.I am of the nature to die. There is no way to escape death.
  4.Everyone(living things) and everything(non living thing) that I love will change, and I will be separated from them.
  5.My actions are my only true belongings. I cannot escape the consequences of my actions. My actions are the ground upon which I stand.


1,2,3,4 --> depicts that i have no control on my age, health, death as well as on the things that i love and on the life of people that i care the most.
	so we shouldn't live in denial and waste precious time or neglect those(things or people) which are most important to us.
	& we should make the most of the life we’ve been given.
	We should treasure what we have in the moment because in the next moment, it could all be gone.
4          --> This is a reminder to not become attached to impermanent things.
              To say that we must not "attach" doesn't mean we can't love and appreciate people and things. It means to not cling to them. 
	Indeed, to appreciate impermanence makes us realize the preciousness of people and the world around us.
5          --> depicts that my life right now is the result of my own actions and choices(i have control on my actions).
	We can choose our actions but we cann't choose the consequences of those actions.
	So, We should just do our best, but we have to accept the consequences for what happens because what other option is there?





2. Dukkha -> suffering, pain, sorrow, anxiety, dissatisfaction, discomfort, stress, misery, frustration, and so on.

Life is dukkha, the Buddha said, but he didn’t mean that it is all unhappiness and disappointment. 
Rather, he meant that ultimately it cannot satisfy. Even when things do satisfy―a pleasant time with friends, a wonderful meal, a new car―the satisfaction doesn’t last because all things are impermanent.




3. no-self:      self -> soul, personality/identity

Buddha taught that there is no unchanging, permanently existing self that inhabits our bodies. In other words, we do not have a fixed, absolute identity. 
There is no soul in body.

The experience of “I” continuing through life as a separate, singular being is an illusion. The 'self' is a different thing, it is an illusion.
What we call the “self” is a construct or sense coming from five aggregates or skandhas that are interdependent and constantly in flux(changing).







