
According to buddhism,
karma is not just the "action".
karma is the "intentional action".
    intention -> action -> fruit/result
karma = seed ;   karmic result = fruit

When there is a volition (cetanā/intention/motivation/will) behind an action, then the action is karmic action (or seed) that will eventually bear fruition.
Every action of body, speech, or mind is considered to be karmic action.



Types of Karma:
1. Positive Karma:
    Good intention -> beneficial actions (for me and others) or,
    Actions motivated by non-attachment, benevolence, and understanding (opposite of three poisons)
2. Negative karma:
    Harmful intention -> Harmful actions   or,
    Actions motivated by greed, ignorance, hatred.

So, intension/will determines the nature of karma(whether it is good or bad karma).
Also, The intentions that lead to action determine what happens to sentient beings. 



Interdependent origination:
1. It says, all phenomena arise due to multiple causes and conditions.
2. The theory of "karmic action and fruition" is part of Independent origination that applies specifically to the intentional actions of sentient beings.
    eg: There is no intention in natural processes/actions like raining, movement of earth, etc. So, Karma is not operating.
3. Within the functioning of karma, every fruition is said to depend upon multiple causes and conditions.
    3.1 The relationship between a single action and its karmic fruition is dependent upon many causes and conditions;
    3.2 thus, the ability to precisely predict the results for any single action is considered to be beyond the comprehension of ordinary beings.
    3.3 Buddha indicated that worrying over the precise results of specific actions will only increase one's suffering or anxiety.



Overcoming habitual tendencies:
Because of habitual tendencies, even when we know our actions aren’t beneficial, sometimes we still do them.
But the more mindful we are and the more certain we become of how karma works, the more our Very strong patterns of behavior or old habits fall away.



Right view:
Understanding karmic action and fruition (karmaphala) is considered essential to the development of "right view".



Rebirth:
The driving force behind rebirth in the six realms of samsara is karma.
The type of birth we have in this life is determined by our actions or karma from our previous life; and 
   the circumstances of our future rebirth are determined by our actions in this life.
A proper understanding of samsara will lead one to have compassion for all beings, including ourselves, who are trapped in this cycle of birth and death.
Compassion is the wish for others(and ourselves) to be free of suffering.
Complete understanding of karmic action and fruition enables beings to free themselves from samsara and attain liberation.
The cause for our rebirth in samsara are the kleshas (disturbing emotions) that lead to the creation of karmic fruition.



Characteristics of Karma:
1. Karma does not imply predestination:
    karmic action and fruition does not imply that our lives are predetermined because of our previous karma.
    Our current situation is due to our past karma, but our future depends on the actions that we take from this moment onward.
2. Karmic fruition is not a judgement:
    karmic fruition is not considered to be a "judgement" imposed by a God or other all-powerful being; 
    rather, this fruition is considered to be the outcome of a natural process.
3. Karmic fruition is nearly impossible to predict with precision:
4. Karmic fruition can manifest quickly or be delayed for years or even lifetimes:
    The actions of beings never go to waste. They are accumulated and, once the time comes, the result will come to fruition.
5. Inevitability of results:
    It is not possible to avoid experiencing the result of a karmic deed once it's been committed.
    karmic fruition are experienced either in this life or in a future lives.



Three types of misunderstanding about Karma:
1. Past-action determinism: 
    The belief that all happiness and suffering, including all future happiness and suffering, arise from previous karma,
    Human beings can not affect future results no matter how much effort they put in.
2. Theistic determinism:
    The belief that all happiness and suffering are caused by the directives of a Supreme Being.
3. Indeterminism or Accidentalism:
    The belief that all happiness and suffering are random, having no cause.




*************
The twelve links of dependent origination (aka twelve nidanas) are said to provide a detailed example of how karma works.
They illustrate how the disturbing emotions (kleshas) lead to the creation of karma, which leads to rebirth in samsara.

There is samsāric good karma, which leads to worldly happiness(like birth in higher realms).
There is liberating karma—which is supremely good, as it ends suffering forever. (nirvana)
Once one has attained liberation one does not generate any further karma.