
Nirvana (or Nibbana):  -> It is the goal of the Buddhist path.
It's Sanskrit meaning is ‘blowing out’ or ‘extinguishing’. It is actually a state.
The Buddha describes nirvāṇa as "the highest happiness" different from the limited, impermanent happiness derived from impermanent things.



Meaning of Nirvana:
1. extinguishing of the three fires(three poisons) i.e.fires of attachment (raga), aversion (dvesha) and ignorance (moha or avidya).

  1.1 Freedom from suffering:
        When 3 fires are extinguished, suffering comes to an end.
        The cessation of suffering is described as complete(or perfect) peace.

  1.2 Freedom from rebirth:
        3 fires are the forces which propel the cycle of rebirth (samsara). 
        When these fires are extinguished, freedom from rebirth is attained.



During life and after death:
A distinction is made between a person's experience of nirvana during their life and after their death.
1. Nirvana in this life:
    It is believed that a practitioner can achieve nirvana during their life, or at the moment of death.
    When a practitioner experiences nirvana during their life, this experience is referred as nirvana-in-this-life.
    Then, Our mind is transformed that has the following qualities:
    1.1 Free from negative mental states:     doubt, worry, anxiety, fear, etc
          free from all ‘complexes’ and obsessions, the worries and troubles.
          free of the obsession with ‘me and mine’.
          complete deconstruction of all of our rigid mental patterns, habits & limiting beliefs. This creates space for true inquiry.
    1.2 Peaceful:
          It is a state of perfect peace that comes when all negative mental states are eliminated.
          His mental health is perfect. He does not repent the past, nor does he brood over the future. He lives fully in the present.
    1.3 Non-reactive:
          He will no longer react or controlled by what he like or dislike.

2. Nirvana after death:
    When an ordinary person dies and their physical body disintegrates, the person's consciousness passes onto a new birth;
       and the person is reborn in one of the six realms of samsara. 
    When a person, who has attained nirvana in his life, dies, their consciousness does not take rebirth into a physical form. It becomes free.
    There are no words to describe the experience of nirvana-after-death.
